---
title: Ironheart, collective contribution Falkirk area foundries made to improving public health
---
Although Carron Company was the first cast iron foundry in the Falkirk area it was consequently the source of ambitious engineers who would open their own foundries turn both Falkirk into a national hub for cast iron lighty castings, used for domestic improvement, but also radiate innovative engineers across the world. Carron Co led the Industrial Revolution and was in 1759 the first planned large scale modern technical iron foundry in the world. Consequently their engineers were at the cutting edge of new ideas, and rare skills and experience which were in great demand in other countries.

Carron Co's ambitious irnfounders would fairly quickly be sought by people who wanted to establsih the latest engineering technology in their own country, initially this was in Russia and Eastern Europe c1780-1830. However in the Falkirk area Carron Co had no competitors for 45 years, until George Sherriff, one of those engineers, returned with wealth from Russia and established, in 1804, the Dalderse Foundry, sited on the north side of the newly completed the Forth & Clyde canal, as Carron Co's first local competitor.   

Competition is the spur to innovation. Dalderse evolved, by 1819, into Falkirk Iron Co which would always maintain a competitive attitude to Carron Co. A doubling of the foundry skills meant even more ambitious engineers and as the area became a hub of specialist skills in kitechen range and hot water heating it also became a hub of innovation. Over the next one hudred years arise some sixty foundries, all engaged in making better cookers and hot water heaters. Some of the most radical developments included the success of the portable American kitchen range cooker developed by Smith & Wellstood, based in Bonnybridge. Its foundry success was led by George Ure a Carron Co trained grate fitter. The succes of this appealing cooker ensured a dmeand which fueled the origin of many new foundries including the Uinon, Camelon, Grahamston, Cockburn's. The search for innovation led to the development of gas and electric powered cookers, particularly centred in the Camelon area foundries including; Forth & Clyde and Sunnyside, and R&A Main.      

Ease of transportation as also an attraction, many were initially based along the Forth & Clyde canal, which enabled access to shipping at Grangemouth and Glasgow, but when the railways arrived locations further afield began appearing. Blooming as a skill hub in light castings the Falkirk area would be home to over sixty different foundries, mainly specialisng in traditional solid fuel cast iron range cookers, portable cooker versions, modern gas and electric cookers, water boiler and room heating stoves, bathtubs and domestic rainwater and sanitation drainage. Many foundries also diversified: Carron Co made Telephoen kiosks, letter post boxes and ships equipment including lamps; George Ure of Smith & Wellstood made Singer sewing machine bodies and piano frames, Falkirk Iron Co into decorative iron and vitreous enamel signage, Grahamston Iron Co became famous for its decorative arches; Cruikshanks in Denny became specialists in cast steel alloys for use in agriculture and engineering; Robert Taylors, of Larbert, became design leaders in solid fuel domestic hot water boilers. all were open to one off and unusual orders: Taylor's and Specialised Castings made sculptures for the artists Eduardo Paolozzi and Anthony Gormley, Carron Co made ring lining segments for the Clyde and Tyne tunnels.     
Two foundries remain in Ironheart, Ballantine Castings in Bo'ness and Drysdale Brothers in Stenhousemuir. Ballantines are a general foundry and have made decorative castings for Big Ben and the Houses of Parliament. Drysdales has its origins in Weir Pumps which now independently specialises in high quality bronze castings. Slightly further afield are Laing's foundry in Lochgelly a long established family concern, which entusiastically support FMF by making for us frypans, bathtubs and the Burn's heads from Tam O'Shanter. Others include another family business, Archibald Young's in Kirkintilloch, a town which was also a concentrated hub of iron foundries, and the ultra modern Taylor's of Hamilton, both are general suppliers to the engineering industry.

examples in pics; ranges cookers, bathtubs, drainage.


